# Disease-Protein-Associations
Identifying Disease-Protein Associations from a Heterogeneous Network using Graph Embedding and Sample Screening

#  **Identification of disease-protein associations** 
Firstly, disease similarity, disease-protein association and protein-protein interaction information are used to construct a heterogeneous network. Then, the graph embedding algorithm DeepWalk is utilized to obtain network node representations for characterizing disease-protein relationships. The support vector data description algorithm is applied to screen the reliable negative samples. Finally, the random forest algorithm is employed to construct a model for identifying potential disease-protein associations. 

#### Dependencies
1. Matlab >= 2020a
2. DiShIn (https://githubfast.com/lasigeBioTM/DiShIn)
3. Karate Club library (https://githubfast.com/benedekrozemberczki/karateclub)
4. SVDD-MATLAB (https://githubfast.com/iqiukp/SVDD-MATLAB)

#### Experimental Steps
1. Human protein-protein interaction, disease-protein association and disease-disease similarity are obtained and calculated based on the HIPPIE 
   database, Uniprot database and MeSH database, respectively. A heterogeneous relationship network is constructed.
2. The DeepWalk algorithm is executed on the constructed heterogeneous relationship network to obtain the embedding features of the disease and 
   protein nodes. The disease-protein association pair feature is generated by concatenating the latent representation of disease and protein.
3. The SVDD algorithm is adopted to construct the optimized hypersphere based on the collected disease-protein association pairs. The reliable 
   disease-protein non-association pairs are screened out. 
4. The Random forest algorithm is employed to construct the prediction model to identify the potential disease-protein association.

#### Methods

1. HumanProteinInteractionNetwork.m: Using data from the HIPPIE database to construct human protein interaction network.
                                     Prior to this, the HIPPIE-current.mitab.txt and uniprot_sprot.fasta files must be 
                                     downloaded from the HIPPIE and UniprotKB databases respectively.

2. MeshDiseaseSimilarity.py: Disease terms are retrieved from the MeSH database. The DiShIn is then adopted to calculate Resnik, Lin and JC 
                             semantic similarity of any two disease terms.

3. RetrieveDiseaseProteinAssociation.m: Retrieve association information between human diseases and human proteins from the UniprotKB 
                                        database. Prior to this, the uniprot_sprot_human.dat file must be downloaded from the UniprotKB 
                                        database.
4. HumanProteinDiseaseAssociationNetwork.m: Based on the constructed protein-protein interaction network, disease similarity network and 
                                            disease-protein association network, a heterogeneous relationship network is constructed.

5. DeepWalk.py: The DeepWalk algorithm is utilized to characterize the associations between disease and protein involved the constructed 
                heterogeneous relationship network. 

6. SelectNegativeSampleswithSVDD.m: The SVDD algorithm is adopted to construct the optimized hypersphere based on the collected disease- 
                                    protein association pairs. The reliable disease-protein non-association pairs are screened out. 

#### Conclusion
In this study, a heterogeneous relationship network containing disease and protein nodes, edges between two diseases, two proteins, disease and protein is constructed. The DeepWalk algorithm, which belongs to graph embedding and deep learning, is used to retrieve the embedding features to characterize the disease-protein association information. The support vector data description method is utilized to screen the reliable disease-protein non-association information. The random forest is employed to construct a model for identifying potential disease-protein associations. Experimental results from a series of non-redundant datasets and an independent dataset demonstrate the excellent robustness of the current method, and its ability to accurately identify disease-related proteins, protein-related diseases, and potential disease-protein associations. Our work provides a novel approach to exploring disease-protein relationships and has important implications for pathomechanism research, target identification and drug discovery.

#### Issues
Please report all usage issues by opening an issue at this repo.

